Hey friends, this is Scott.
I want you to know
how much I appreciate you
as listeners. And I hope
you appreciate my sponsors because
they make this show possible.
Raygun provides full stack error,
crash, and performance monitoring for
tech teams. Whether you're a
software engineer looking to diagnose
and resolve issues with greater
speed and accuracy or a
product manager drowning in bug
reports, or maybe you're just
concerned. You're losing customers to
poor quality online experiences. Raygun
can provide you with the
answers. Get full stack error
and performance monitoring in one
place. The next time you're
struggling to replicate errors and
performance issues in your code
base. Think Raygun head over
to raygun.com. That's R a
Y G U n.com and
get up and running within
minutes and dramatically improve your
online experiences of your users.
Hi, This is Scott Hanselman.
This is another episode of
Hansel minutes today. I'm talking
with Nick Justine house from
I N C l.ca and
the accessibility rules podcast. How
are you, sir? I'm doing
pretty good. Scotch yourself. I'm
lovely. And thanks for chatting
with me today. You are
a speaker and a trainer
and a consultant on web
accessibility and disability, and you're
actually a Francophone as well,
a bilingual. Do you podcast
in both English and French?
No, I started podcasting in
English, but I'm actually preparing
a couple episode in French
for ready for the best
tea day. 14th of July coming up
in a couple of months.
Alright, now you're up in
Canada? Yeah, Montreal. Alright, cool.
So one of the things
that I wanted to talk
with you today about is
I noticed in April, end
of April, that the web
content accessibility guidelines WC a
G is at a proposed
recommendation. I knew that there
was a content accessibility guidelines
too. That was, I want
to say 2008. Did we
just go from two to
2.1 and it took 10
years to do it. That's
right. It took 10 years
to get there. And it
took quite a long time
to go from one to
two as well, but things
are pretty much on the
ball now. So we're going
to, to see a more
rapid iteration in as much
that the W3C does not
do anything quickly because their
standards and it's important to
get it right. But yeah,
we're, we're moving ahead with
2.1, I have it on
good authority. That is going
to be a proposed recommendation
in June. So as of
next month, that's good not
to put too fine a
point on it, but I'm
going to go out on
a limb and say that
it's a lot has happened
in 10 years. Why is
this not 3.0 because they're
working on silver, which is
actually going away from the,
a denomination of content accessibility
Guidelines, that's actually going to
be called just the accessibility
guidelines. So the coordinating is
silver since accessibility guidelines is
AIG, which is on the
periodic table reflecting the name
of silver. So they, they
needed to get something in
between to be able to
address some of the issues
in 2.0 that aren't addressed
around cognitive disabilities, around low
vision issues and a few
other things that we had
realized as experts that weren't
working quite as expected in
a, in two point. Oh,
I see. Okay. So let
me see if I can
paraphrase it if I understand
this. So 2.1 is a,
is a revision or a
refinement of 2.0, which was
well thought of and been
around for a while. So
even though it's 10 years,
it's a good thing that
we're kind of tightening the
screws on, on WC AIG
2.0, and then the, the
element for silver as AIG.
So then that would explain
why it's codenamed silver, and
then that's going to be
the next generation, the next,
the future of web access.
That's correct. It's important to
understand that the upcoming 2.1
are not actually eliminating everything
in 2.0 is kind of
a, an add on, so
there's a series of success
criteria that are going to
be added to, to the
guidelines, but they're not superseding
what was there in the
past. So it's, it's extending
and improving. What's already there.
Who are these guidelines for?
Are they for me and
the listener who are web
developers or are they for
the browser makers? The short
answer is yes. Therefore for
everybody out there, the browser
makers need to understand what's
happening on there because they
may need to, to understand
how to implement some of
the things under the hood,
but that's not really primarily
domain thing. I think it's
mostly about the developers and
the business owners out there
that want to make their
site or web based apps
accessible for people with disabilities.
It's really kind of like
a blueprint of things that
we need to do to
make sure that the site
works for, for everyone, regardless
of technology, assistive technology, etc.
And there was a word
or a phrase that you
put in there just a
moment ago, success criteria. That's
a very important phrase. It's
kind of the thing that
informs the entire working group.
Yeah. The web content accessibility
guidelines are broken down into
different different elements. And first
there's four principles. Those are
elements must be perceivable, operable,
understandable, and robust based on
those four principle. Then we
have 12 guidelines and each
guidelines is broken down into
a success criteria. So we
may have things, for example,
a success criteria. 1.1 0.1
is non-text content. That's basically
the success criteria that explains
that if you have an
image, we have to have
alternate information about it for
screen reader users. Basically of
course, if there's information about
the image for screen reader,
users, suddenly there's information for
search engine crawlers. An image
is not normally going to
give very much information to,
to Google or Bing or
other search engines. So these
success criteria is, are there
to help us understand what
we need to do to
make a page or an
app access. Hmm. Okay. And
then this breaks down these
four principles of accessibility into
like a little bit more
detail. So for example, the
first one perceivable, it says
it can't be invisible to
all of the senses. The
user has to have some
way to get that information
that's right now, most people,
I would say most kind
of like what is the
term? If someone is not
disabled or not differently abled,
we don't say normal, regular,
typical. What is the right
phrase In the disability community?
We often jokingly say, instead
of able-bodied, we'll say they're
temporarily able-bodied because at some
point in our lives, we
all acquire some form of
disability, whether it's a, it's
a temporary impairment, a situational
impairment or a permanent one.
But I think that people
without disabilities able bodied people,
I think these classifications ultimately
are not particularly useful because
we obviously, the concept of
accessibility is to help people
with disabilities, but these things
help everyone. It, it really
comes down to usability. For
example, there is a success
criteria and WCAB, that is
about color contrast. So you
have to make sure that
the text has enough contrast
against this background. And if
I'm going to date the
specific for small texts, which
is smaller than 18 point,
the color contrast ratio must
be 4.5 to one. So
it's got to have a
fair amount of contrast. So
if you're thinking great text
on gray background, it's not
going to meet that success
criteria from an accessibility perspective.
But if you go out
and look at the side
that has great text on
gray background on your phone
and you're in full sun,
chances are, you're not going
to be able to see
and make sense of what's
on the page anyways. So
we're looking at tying things
that help people with disabilities
that also help everybody else.
You know, that is a
really Like if, if anyone
gets a message out of
this podcast, in my opinion,
I think it would be
that this isn't about web
developers who are listening to
the show thinking, eh, here's
some extra markup that I
put on my website. So
1% of my users that
aren't me can use my
website. It's really, here's a
set of best practices that
are going to make the
web Available to everyone better
for people who are Typically
abled and much better for
people who are differently abled.
Is that fair? Okay. Yeah.
That's, that's fair to say
that there's, there's all kinds
of examples like that. You
know, w one of the
things that we recommend is
use plain English when you're
out on your site. I
assuming your site is in
English, right? So plain language.
And that's really good for
people that have maybe cognitive
impairments or learning disability like
dyslexia, but it's also really
good for translation engines. Like,
you know, Google translate. It's
also very good for people
that have maybe a situational
impairment. Let's say you're a
mother of a, of a
young baby. It's 4:00 AM. Your
baby is not doing too
well. And you're juggling on
the one hand, the baby
in your left arm. And
you're trying to look up
information on your phone, on
the right arm, if things
are written clearly and succinctly,
you're going to be able
to get the information much
easier. So there's, you know,
there's all kinds of information
of not information, but of
concepts like that, that were
primarily for people with disabilities
and, and kind of carry
over into a wider audience.
Yeah. I noticed that there's
a bunch of really great
features on my iPhone for
you, that you can allows
you to use the iPhone
with one hand. I don't
typically use it with one
hand, but again, you have
groceries in one hand and
then you are situationally differently
able then suddenly you're going
to want to be able
to use those features. And
I just use them without
thinking, I don't think of
them as accessibility features. And
that's a, that's really useful.
Yeah. Incidentally, while we're talking
about accessibility feature on the
iPhone and that applies to
two other platforms, Android as
well. And a lot of
these technology that we're using
now, without even really thinking
about it actually started as
assistive technology. So, you know,
one of the, one of
the primary example I gave
in my, in my talk
about the evolution of assistive
technology is, is the keyboard.
You know, the keyboard, as
we know, it is pretty
much a devolution from a
Hanson ball typewriter that, that
started in the 18 hundreds
where director of a school
for the deaf wanted his
deaf students to be able
to write and interact with
people as fast as people
were talking. And from there
evolve. So we were using
today a product that was
initially conceived for people with
disabilities. If we're talking about
Siri, the assistant is also
an evolution of that. There
there's all kinds of things
that we use in pretty
much every day that started
their life as product design
for people with disabilities and
lo and behold, it's, it's
actually really useful for everyone.
Yeah. And in fact, if
you take the series and
the Cortanas and the Alexa's
of the world, they, they
are often faster and more
convenient. I'm still trying to
convince my spouse that talking
to Siri to search the
web is faster than using
her thumbs. So sometimes we
have, you know, search races
to see who can find
the information quicker. And usually
asking a digital assistant is
a, is a better way
than just capping it out.
Yeah. And the funny thing
is, is that, you know,
these products that came into
everyday use for us are
suddenly going through that circle
again, or of being even
more useful for people with
different disabilities. There was a,
a bunch of noise happening
a few weeks ago, maybe
even a month ago, about
how people who are blind
really are appreciating the ability
to use Alexa for, for
all kinds of things. So
it's the circle. You know,
something comes for people with
disabilities that goes into wide
use for everyday use, and
then there's refinements on that.
And it helps people with
disabilities and even more, One
of the things that I've
been really happy about is
there there's, there are people
who like closed captioning and
there are people who need
closed captioning. I don't know
if it's because I'm getting
older, but my wife and
I always watched television with
the captioning on somehow I
make it, I don't know.
It simultaneously makes my hearing
better and worse, but I
never miss a word because
I bet the words on.
Yeah, of course now I
can't watch a show without
the captioning because I feel
like I'm missing something. But
I've noticed that the, the
rise of Twitter is that
all videos have captioning at
the bottom. And that, you
know, you have like those
news videos that you can
watch a video with audio
muted in line, like at
a it's a DMV or
something. And I really enjoy
that. I think that's a,
that's a benefit for everybody.
Yeah. And it's also useful,
you know, captioning is useful.
If you're trying to find
out information about something or
other who you find a
tutorial on YouTube, you're in
a cubicle, a large room
with dozens of people. You
don't want everybody to listen
in as to what you're
doing. You don't want to
disturb their ability to work
or get on calls. So
suddenly captions are very helpful.
Yeah. And that's one of
the reasons that, that this
podcast has partnered with a
company called Gretta, G R
E T T A.com. So
we have captioning and transcripts
for all the episodes of,
of Hansel minutes. And I've
also got captioning on my
other podcast, Azure Friday. And
that works great. Not just
for people who, with a
hearing disability, but with people
who are learning English, they
can read and listen along.
Yes. I've been pushing so
hard for everybody that I
know that podcasts provide transcripts
because it makes a big
difference for, as you say,
people that are not necessarily
native native English speakers. If
someone is looking for information,
it's often faster for them
to read a transcript faster
than they can sit through
a half hour show. It's
also a question of making
things accessible for people that
aren't able to listen to
the show, but there was
a, a case study done
by, by NPR when they
decided to put their transcripts
on every single show for
this American life, they saw
a whole bunch of benefits.
Suddenly they had more search
engine results. They had more
people coming to the show.
They had more people download
the show and they realized
they had an indexed transcript
of every single show they
had. So they could find
information quite easily about what
was on the show five
years ago or seven years
ago. Absolutely. Hey folks, I
want to take a moment
to thank our sponsors and
remind you that when you
support them, you're supporting Hanselman
it's because they make this
show possible. Innovative developers help
improve the lives of millions
of small businesses and accountants
that use QuickBooks worldwide. Your
app could make the difference
that helps them work smarter
and put more money in
their pocket. Enter Intuit developer
from tech tools to growing
your customer base, to helping
you get funding. Intuit developer
helps your app go from
concept to company, find out
more at intuit.me/code that's I
N T U I t.me/code.
It seems like there's all.
So a, a use for
AI here. If you were,
you were mentioned before at
the very beginning, thinking about
images right now on Twitter.
If I tweet an image
right underneath the image, there's
a click that says add
description. So it's basically making
the all tag a very
natural thing to type, but,
you know, barring typing that
myself manually. I think that
either now or in the
future, we'll be able to
have AIS that can say,
yeah, this is a picture
of a red lunchbox sitting
on a table. And that
can be described even if
a human didn't do it.
AI is the future of
many accessibility features on YouTube.
Right now they have auto
caption and it's not a
hundred percent accurate. In fact,
it might be 85% accurate.
And if you're missing that
one crucial word in 10,
it, it can be aggravating,
but things are getting better.
Facebook has already started in
implementing auto captions for photos.
And again, it's not perfect,
but it's a lot better
than it was a few
years ago. And the more
things go, the more data
AI is going to have
to be able to, to
Paris this information and make
it more usable for people
with disabilities. So I definitely
think AI is going to
have a huge part to
play in accessibility in future.
Now you are, you are
physically disabled, you're in a
wheelchair. Does that affect your
browsing? Mm, No. It has
no direct effect on my
browsing as a wheelchair user.
I do have a bit
of arthritis in my hands,
so that can sometimes impact
my, my ability to use
a mouse. And two years
ago, I, I was very
silly and I ended up
breaking both my wrists. So
instead of being able to
type 80 words per minute,
I was stuck with a
very uncomfortable type with two
fingers kind of situation. So
I ended up having to
use assistive technology like dragon
dictate to, to interact with
my computer. So that, that
was interesting because as a
wheelchair user, I had one
view of accessibility, but suddenly
becoming more or differently to
say bold in another range,
I had to readapt myself
to, to interacting with my
technology. That must have been
like emotionally, a very strange
feeling because you have one
disability, you feel like you're
as empathetic as one could
be. You understand disability, you're
dealing with ramps all day,
then you break your wrists
and then you're like, Oh
crap, is this what it's
like for people with quote
unquote with a, with a
disability like that? Is it
affecting their day to day
work in such a fundamental
way? Like suddenly my brain
can't get the keys, get
the information into the computer
as fast as before. Did
that, was that a shock
to the system? It was
not a shock in that
way. The shock for me,
it was really this discovery
that the assistive technology you
really have to learn and
there's learning curves. And, you
know, for example, I was
using dragon dictate, which is
a really powerful piece of
software that works best on
windows in English. I am
a Mac user, so I
was trained to use it
on the Mac and that
was complicated. And I could
not use the French version
of it on a Mac
at all, because that's just
really not friendly. So basically
I discovered that the best
piece of assistive technology forced
me into using a different
platform altogether, if I want
it to be performance. So
there's, there's this realization that
for example, someone who's blind
who may have been using
jars and a screen reader
called for 15 years may
not have an option to
actually switch to a different
browser or a different platform
because their assistive technology works
best is optimized best for
certain browser on a certain
platform. Hmm. Yeah. You had
mentioned that there, there, there
is combinations that are, they're
not official, but they are
kind of like the defacto
combination of this browser on
this platform. And this language
is going to give someone
with a certain disability, the
most success. And if they
change one piece of that,
they're going to bump into
issues all the time. Yeah.
Yeah. That is frustrating. I'm
looking at this list of
success criteria, the ones that
are new to the, the
WC AIG orientation is an
interesting one because I realized
that 10 years ago, we
weren't necessarily thinking about, you
know, portrait versus landscape. Yeah.
Do you know why orientation
is so important? I think
for me, it's when I'm
in bed, I want Netflix
to be one way and
I've got my head the
other way, but I honestly
don't know. Yeah. A lot
of people that have mobility
and impairments, whether they're quadriplegic
or have Cyril policy or
something like that will actually
Mount their device, whether it's
a phone or an iPad
on their wheelchair and they
can't actually change the orientation
of their device easily. So
if your site is coded
that it's only gonna work
on portrait or only going
to work in landscape, suddenly
these people may not have
the ability to actually use
your, your interface. See, and
this is the thing about
accessibility. I think that people
who do not have any
major disabilities need to think
about is you might not
be able to even consider,
like, why would that matter?
And then once you learn,
you're like, Oh, Oh, of
course. Yeah. Yeah. Every one
of these success criteria and
every one of these accessibility
things, once you get it,
you immediately go, of course,
absolutely. This is important. This
is important. That's right. Yeah.
That's amazing. So these success
criteria, there's a bunch of
them as like, you know,
a dozen and a half
that are being added. Many
of them are like we
said, refinements, but also new
things where orientation came up
and then also like motion.
Actuations another interesting one. There
are, I have applications on
my, on my iPhone that
require you to do Shake
the phone. Yeah. That seems
to be a new thing.
Shake the phone for feedback.
Not everybody can do that.
That's good. Someone else might
be shaking all the time
because of their disabilities. Are
they sending feedback constantly? They're
not. So you need to
real to think about that
when you go and just
Throw in a feature like
shake for feedback. Yeah. That's
a tough one. So these
success criteria you said are
for both the browser manufacturers
and for the Developers, is
there a tool that I
can run? Is there one
tool that I can run
on? Like for example, my
podcast site, that's going to
tell me that I'm okay.
Or will I never be
100% accessible? The first thing
to realize is that accessibility
is not a checklist. And
the 12, we have all
these success criteria. It's very
unlikely that all of them
will apply to your site
or your app. The other
thing is that while there
are accessibility testing tools out
there that runs a somewhat
automatically, they're not going to
catch every problem out there.
And some of these tools
will, will even say, Hey,
actually you have to manually
review these items. So with,
with that caveat, there's, there's
two tools that I think
developers can, can really use
and rely on. One is
called the ax accessibility plug
in S a X E
is by DEQ DEQ, U
E. And it's available as
a plugin for Chrome or
Firefox. And it's through the
inspector tools and it will
actually scan your page and
pick up potential accessibility issues.
The other one is more
of an API driven system,
which is commercial. It's called
tenon.io, T E N O
n.io. And that's a really
powerful tool that will do
the same thing. It's going
to scan your entire site.
If you want to have
the entire site scanned. And
it's going to give potential
issues. These automated testing tool
at the moment are on
testing against WCAG 2.0 because
it's, it's not quite yet
a guideline that is ready
for prime time. The 2.1.
However, that said, if you're
quoting, you really want to
future proof your, your site
and your application. So you
should look at using 2.1.
Mm. So yeah, automated tools
are great to get a
feel for what's going on
on a page or a
site to get a pulse
as to what's happening and
to get an idea. But
there's nothing that's going to
be manual assessment by, by
someone who's actually used to
do that. And then the
ultimate is to actually do
user testing, what people who
are actually people with disabilities.
So, you know, I've been
doing WebEx disability for 23
years now. And when I
do an audit, invariably, there's
always one person that uses
the web in a way
that I didn't expect or
will because of their combination
of existing technology. We'll find
stuff that isn't quite what
I expected. So user testing
with real people with disabilities
is definitely something you should
do at the end of
the process. How far can
we take it though? We
want to include everyone. But,
you know, as They say
on the internet long tail,
as long a you can
hit 80%, 90%, 99%. Everyone
has different abilities. We, we,
we talked about all the
different abilities and disabilities that
we haven't thought about. That
one, you know, it's, it's
not my disability until it's,
you know, it is, if
I bring in blind people
for testing, deaf people protesting,
et cetera, will I ever
be finished? You said, it's
not a checklist, but when
do I know when to
stop? Yeah. You know, there's,
there's always edge cases. And
one of the things that
I've heard over and over
the last two decades of
doing a sustainability is, but
Nick, I can't code for
the person who's deaf, blind
and paralyzed from neck down.
And of course that that's,
you know, a rare situation.
What I tell people is
code to the standard, make
sure that things are meeting
WCAB level, double a, as
much as possible and throw
in as many success criteria
from level AAA as you
can, and you're going to
be doing good. And then
if you have someone who
comes to you and say,
Hey, I can't use your
side because XYZ, then you
can look at how you
can implement that. But bottom
line is you want to
put in maybe 20% of
your effort to get 80%
of the way to accessibility,
get those low hanging fruits
that are actually typically fairly
easy to meet. If you
follow the guidelines and you'll
beat in goods. Hmm. That's
a good point. It's also
worth pointing out that it's,
it needs to be more
than just a casual Googling
for accessibility checker running and
pushing a button that says
check it. Like I just
went to a random place
and I typed in hanselminutes.com
and it says no known
problems. Okay. Yeah. I could
go and say, I'm good.
But then I also went
and looked at the ax
tool that you pointed me
to, and it gave me
41 violations with 86 needs
review. And then I went
to tenon, which is a
different tool by a different
company. And it said there
were four issues. So here's
three different tools that I've
used. One says, four, one
says nearly 86, but 41
are definite violations. And one
said, none. So depending on
who you ask, I either
have no work to do
or weeks of work to
do. So I need to
put some thought into that.
Yeah. I think it's a
fair assumption that if you
have a tool that says
you have no accessibility issue,
you can completely forget that
tool because unless you have
done a lot of work
to make sure that there
are no accessibility issues, there
will be, there will be
issues, but, you know, comparing
X to 10 and they
have different rules, they check
for different things and different
levels of being strict. So
you have to do a
bit of a balancing act,
but you know, if you
have questions, go on Twitter
and use the hashtag
and ask away, or there's
a, there's an accessibility Slack
channel that you use where
people are very happy to
share knowledge. So when in
doubt, ask the experts. So
accessibility is often a reverberated
as the, not an acronym,
but a numerous him. Yup.
A 11. Why we're the
number 11 is the number
of letters omitted. And that
is also the one of
the titles of your podcast.
It's a 11, why rules.com?
You've been doing this for
a while now with conversations
around web accessibility, with a
lot of different guests, both
abled and disabled. Yes. It's
been fantastic. I wanted, you
know, I've been doing accessibility
for so long and met
so many people. And suddenly
I realized, I don't know
these people, I don't know
what they really think. We,
we share technical tidbits and
all that, but I want
to get to know these
people better. And then I
thought, well, surely I'm not
the only one in the
community that wants to do
that. So I thought let's
do a podcast. And suddenly
it's, it's been really interesting
because I speak to a
wide range of people and
I pretty much ask the
same basic questions. And from
there, the conversations really expands
into weird and wonderful and
fantastic areas where I'm getting
to think about my own
area of expertise differently. And
I've had something like 23,
24 guests. So far, I
always ask, how do you
define accessibility? And the out
of 23 guests, 24 guests,
I've had 24 different answers.
It all revolves around the
same thing, but everybody has
a little bit of a
closer definition or something that
they really care about that
they want to, to involve
in that. So it's really
kind of fascinating just briefly.
I have also a enough
shoot of that. The accessibility
rules, some bites where I
do short segments, five to
10 minutes with people with
disabilities, where I ask them,
you know, what's your impairment,
what's your barrier? And what
do you want designers and
developers to know? So that,
that's a good way to,
to hear it in their
own words as to why
these things are important. It
was actually a very clever
way to, to make a
30 or 40 minute long
podcast, also accessible to people
who maybe don't have the
time or the patience. You
can go to a 11,
why rules.com right at the
top there, click on soundbites.
You get five minutes on,
you know, how does ADHD
affect a web person? How
does a screen reader work?
What does speech recognition or
colorblindness? That's a very clever
way to make your podcast
even more accessible. Thank you.
Well, thanks so much for
chatting with me today. It's
been a pleasure. Thanks for
having me on We're going
to have links to all
the different things we talked
about, like 10 and NIO
and ax and on and
on as well as jaws
and the very important WC
AIG, 2.1 rules as well
as links to Nick's podcast,
the ALNY rules podcast. This
has been another episode of
Hanselminutes and we'll see you
again next week. .